Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is a collection geographically distributed self-governing sensors. It consists of sensor nodes constrained by its limited processing power and battery life. The major challenge in WSN is of developing an energy efficient approach for its long-term operations. Data aggregation is one of the appreciated and accepted approach which efficiently reduces energy consumption in the network. There is high demand for research and development of efficient mechanism to adapt data aggregation with the routing approaches of WSNs. Many arrgegation approachs have been proposed which claims to be efficient in their respective application scenario. This paper provides an exhaustive analysis of different structureless data aggregation algorithms in WSNs. Algorithms were analyzed for their networking features and performance criterias to get an hypothetical view of recent research work done in the specified area.    This work helps in understanding different approaches and involved features which has there impacts on WSNs performance. Individual algorithms were traced with the environment for which it was developed. In recent days, WSNs have become an integral part of our daily lives because of its varied applications ranging from healthcare to military surveillance[1]. WSN contains sensors which can act as data generating and forwarding nodes. A sensor node consists of a sensing equipment along with a transceiver to transfer the sensed data. These sensor nodes are small, with limited battery and computational capacity. The sensor nodes are generally deployed in difficult-to-access locations, hence, it requires wireless transfer of data to the sink[2]. WSNs can be applied in various areas of military surveillance[3,4] , disaster relief, health care[5] and dangerous environment exploration. Its applications can be broadly classified into two categories of monitoring and tracking. Environmental and industrial environment monitoring are some of the monitoring based applications of WSNs[6]. Tracking applications include tracking movements of animals, human and vehicles like military aircraft.With development in microelectromechanical systems(MEMS) technology, the design and expansion of battery powered multifunctional nodes is possible. The sophisticated and efficient communication protocols have made us realize the real potential of sensor networks. Generally, a WSN consists of a large number of sensor nodes, which are distributed randomly or in a predefined structure. A nodes in a WSN is battery powered device with limited processing and memory capabilities. These constraints are the key issues in establishing an efficient WSN with the longer lifespan. Current state-of-the-art energy efficient routing protocols provide a quick fix for designing and developing WSNs in different environments[7]. With these existing protocols, nodes can be deployed in a structured pattern or in a self-organizing manner. These self-organizing protocols are also referred to as virtually structured protocols for sensor networks. Table 1 lists out some of the routing protocols used for self-organizing sensor networks. As sensor is constrained by limited power, energy utilization is a critical concern in WSNs. Due to these reasons, considerable significance has been given for research in the field of minimizing energy usage in WSNs. Efficient energy usage plays an important role in increasing network lifetime. The energy depletion of a particular node significantly affects the functioning of the entire network, hence energy should be economically used to increase network life span. Increase in network lifespan can be achieved through efficient and conscientious routing policies[10,11], smart sensor placement methodologies[8,9] and protocols that provide lofty data aggregation ratios[12]. Reduction in number of transmissions assists in increasing sensor lifetime and lowered bandwidth usage. It is possible by aggregating data from different sensor nodes and then forwarding it to sink as shown in Fig 1. Data aggregation assists in collecting and fusing only useful information from the multiple sensors. These fused data is then efficiently routed to the base station. Increased aggregation ratios play an integral part in energy conservation. Two necessary conditions for efficient data aggregation ratios are spatial and temporal convergence. Spatial convergence focuses on establishing efficient routes from discrete sensor nodes to the sink whereas temporal convergence is responsible for efficient timing and control. Data aggregation protocols can be broadly classified into two categories (A) Structured (B) Structureless. Clustering and tree-based are the two approaches used in structured data aggregation. In cluster based data aggregation, the nodes of WSN is organized into different clusters based on performance and geographical features. Each cluster has a cluster head who is responsible to aggregate data from remaining nodes in the same cluster. It then forwards the aggregated data to the base station. Some of the proposed algorithms in this category are LEACH[13], DACP[14] and HEED[15]. Compared to LEACH, DACP has an additional feature of data prediction which increases data aggregation ratios. HEED provides a solution to avoid two sensor nodes in the transmission range to become cluster head at the same time by considering its relative position[15].  Tree based approach works by constructing a minimum spanning tree structure that connects all the nodes and then transferring the aggregated data upstream until it reaches the sink. Mingxin Yang proposed a tree based approach by constructing energy efficient tree which reduced energy consumption by constructing minimum spanning tree and applying information entropy to find relationship among the sensed data[16]. Another tree-based data aggregation protocol was proposed by Fen Zhou et al., which dealt with maximizing the lifetime of data-aggregation tree. They adapted  three different aggregation modes: full aggregation, non-aggregation and hybrid partial aggregation.   They also, proposed  a solution to find optimal data gathering tree based on Mixed Integer linear Programming(MIP)[17].